# Sparkify SQL Postgres ETL

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
In this project, I apply following concepts:

- **Data modeling with Postgres**
- **Database star schema created** 
- **ETL pipeline using Python**

## Project Goals

My role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. I will be able to test their database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to me by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare my results with their expected results.

### Project Datasets

- **Song datasets**: The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset*. 

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
A sample of this files is:

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

- **Log datasets**:The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.The log files in the dataset with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```
A sample of a single row of each files is:

```
{"artist":"Slipknot","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Aiden","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Ramirez","length":192.57424,"level":"paid","location":"New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540283578796.0,"sessionId":19,"song":"Opium Of The People (Album Version)","status":200,"ts":1541639510796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"20"}
```

## Database Schema
The schema used for this exercise is the Star Schema: 
There is one main fact table containing all the measures associated to each event (user song plays), 
and 4 dimentional tables, each with a primary key that is being referenced from the fact table.

On why to use a relational database for this case:
- The data types are structured (we know before-hand the sctructure of the jsons we need to analyze, and where and how to extract and transform each field)
- The amount of data we need to analyze is not big enough to require big data related solutions.
- Ability to use SQL that is more than enough for this kind of analysis
- Data needed to answer business questions can be modeled using simple ERD models
- We need to use JOINS for this scenario

#### Fact Table
**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
- songplay_id (INT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of each user song play 
- start_time (DATE) NOT NULL: Timestamp of beggining of user activity
- user_id (INT) NOT NULL: ID of user
- level (TEXT): User level {free | paid}
- song_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of Song played
- artist_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of Artist of the song played
- session_id (INT): ID of the user Session 
- location (TEXT): User location 
- user_agent (TEXT): Agent used by user to access Sparkify platform

#### Dimension Tables
**users** - users in the app
- user_id (INT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of user
- first_name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Name of user
- last_name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Last Name of user
- gender (TEXT): Gender of user {M | F}
- level (TEXT): User level {free | paid}

**songs** - songs in music database
- song_id (TEXT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of Song
- title (TEXT) NOT NULL: Title of Song
- artist_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of song Artist
- year (INT): Year of song release
- duration (FLOAT) NOT NULL: Song duration in milliseconds

**artists** - artists in music database
- artist_id (TEXT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of Artist
- name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Name of Artist
- location (TEXT): Name of Artist city
- lattitude (FLOAT): Lattitude location of artist
- longitude (FLOAT): Longitude location of artist

**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
- start_time (DATE) PRIMARY KEY: Timestamp of row
- hour (INT): Hour associated to start_time
- day (INT): Day associated to start_time
- week (INT): Week of year associated to start_time
- month (INT): Month associated to start_time 
- year (INT): Year associated to start_time
- weekday (TEXT): Name of week day associated to start_time


## Project structure

Files used on the project:
1. **data** folder nested at the home of the project, where all needed jsons reside.
2. **sql_queries.py** contains all sql queries, and is imported into the files below.
3. **create_tables.py** drops and creates tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
4. **test.ipynb** displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.
5. **etl.ipynb** reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables. 
6. **etl.py** reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. 
7. **README.md** current file, provides discussion on my project.

## Authors

* **Qaiser Ali Khan** - [Github](https://github.com/qaiseralikhan) - [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/qaiseralikhan/)
