# Sparkify Data Lake with Spark 

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

In this project, I apply following concepts:

- ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3
- Processes them using Spark
- loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables

## Project Goals

My role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for the analysis. I will be able to test their database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to me by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare my results with their expected results.

## ETL pipeline

1. Load credentials
2. Read data from S3
    - Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
    - Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

    The script reads song_data and load_data from S3.

3. Process data using spark

    Transforms them to create five different tables listed under `Dimension Tables and Fact Table`.
    Each table includes the right columns and data types. Duplicates are addressed where appropriate.

4. Load it back to S3

    Writes them to partitioned parquet files in table directories on S3.

    Each of the five tables are written to parquet files in a separate analytics directory on S3. Each table has its own folder within the directory. Songs table files are partitioned by year and then artist. Time table files are partitioned by year and month. Songplays table files are partitioned by year and month.

### Project Datasets

- **Song datasets**: The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset*. 

```
s3://udacity-dend/song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
s3://udacity-dend/song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
A sample of this files is:

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

- **Log datasets**:The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.The log files in the dataset with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
s3://udacity-dend/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
s3://udacity-dend/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```
A sample of a single row of each files is:

```
{"artist":"Slipknot","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Aiden","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Ramirez","length":192.57424,"level":"paid","location":"New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540283578796.0,"sessionId":19,"song":"Opium Of The People (Album Version)","status":200,"ts":1541639510796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"20"}
```

## Database Schema
The schema used for this exercise is the Star Schema: 
There is one main fact table containing all the measures associated to each event (user song plays), and 4 dimentional tables, each with a primary key that is being referenced from the fact table.

#### Fact Table
**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
- songplay_id (INT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of each user song play 
- start_time (DATE) NOT NULL: Timestamp of beggining of user activity
- user_id (INT) NOT NULL: ID of user
- level (TEXT): User level {free | paid}
- song_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of Song played
- artist_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of Artist of the song played
- session_id (INT): ID of the user Session 
- location (TEXT): User location 
- user_agent (TEXT): Agent used by user to access Sparkify platform

#### Dimension Tables
**users** - users in the app
- user_id (INT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of user
- first_name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Name of user
- last_name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Last Name of user
- gender (TEXT): Gender of user {M | F}
- level (TEXT): User level {free | paid}

**songs** - songs in music database
- song_id (TEXT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of Song
- title (TEXT) NOT NULL: Title of Song
- artist_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of song Artist
- year (INT): Year of song release
- duration (FLOAT) NOT NULL: Song duration in milliseconds

**artists** - artists in music database
- artist_id (TEXT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of Artist
- name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Name of Artist
- location (TEXT): Name of Artist city
- lattitude (FLOAT): Lattitude location of artist
- longitude (FLOAT): Longitude location of artist

**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
- start_time (DATE) PRIMARY KEY: Timestamp of row
- hour (INT): Hour associated to start_time
- day (INT): Day associated to start_time
- week (INT): Week of year associated to start_time
- month (INT): Month associated to start_time 
- year (INT): Year associated to start_time
- weekday (TEXT): Name of week day associated to start_time


## Project structure

Files used on the project:
1. **dl.cfg:** not uploaded to github - you need to create this file yourself File with AWS credentials.
2. **etl.py:** Program that extracts songs and log data from S3, transforms it using Spark, and loads the dimensional tables created in parquet format back to S3.. 
3. **README.md** current file, provides discussion on my project.

## Authors

* **Qaiser Ali Khan** - [Github](https://github.com/qaiseralikhan) - [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/qaiseralikhan/)